>> Stewart: ON THIS EDITION FOR
SATURDAY, JANUARY 30: IT'S THE
FINAL WEEKEND OF CAMPAIGNING IN
IOWA BEFORE MONDAY'S CAUCUSES;
GROWING CONCERN OVER THE ZIKA
VIRUS AS NEW CASES ARE REPORTED;
AND IN OUR SIGNATURE SEGMENT,
WEST POINT CADETS USING SOCIAL
MEDIA TO FIGHT ISIS
PROPAGANDA.
NEXT ON PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS OF
LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
ALISON STEWART.
>> Stewart: GOOD EVENING.
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
AFTER A YEAR OF CAMPAIGNING, THE
FIRST VOTING OF THE 2016 RACE
FOR THE WHITE HOUSE FINALLY
BEGINS IN 48 HOURS.
REPUBLICAN AND DEMOCRATIC VOTERS
IN IOWA WILL MEET IN PARTY
CAUCUSES MONDAY NIGHT TO CHOOSE
THEIR PREFERRED STANDARD BEARERS
FOR THEIR PARTY'S PRESIDENTIAL
NOMINATION.
MOST OF THE MAJOR CANDIDATES
WERE IN IOWA TODAY FOR THE LAST
WEEKEND PUSH.
THE CANDIDATES HAVE COLLECTIVELY
SPENT MORE CAMPAIGN DAYS IN IOWA
THAN ANY OTHER STATE, AND NOW
THEY CAN SEE THE FINISH LINE.
>> THAT'S WHY I'M HERE TODAY, TO
ASK YOU TO CAUCUS FOR ME MONDAY
NIGHT.
>> Stewart: ON MONDAY NIGHT,
IOWANS WILL GATHER IN EACH OF
THE STATE'S 99 COUNTIES FOR
CAUCUSES.
THE GREATER COMPETITION IS ON
THE REPUBLICAN SIDE, WITH A MORE
CROWDED FIELD.
TEXAS SENATOR TED CRUZ HAS
BRANDED HIMSELF THE OUTSIDER WHO
CAN BRING CHANGE.
>> IF YOU SEE A CANDIDATE WHO
WASHINGTON EMBRACES, RUN AND
HIDE.
>> Stewart: THE CAUCUSES AND THE
FIRST-IN-THE-NATION NEW
HAMPSHIRE PRIMARY EIGHT DAYS
LATER MAY WINNOW THE FIELD OF
CANDIDATES.
ON THE DEMOCRATIC SIDE, VERMONT
SENATOR BERNIE SANDERS URGED
SUPPORTERS TO SHOW UP AT THE
CAUCUSES WITH ANY LIKE-MINDED
NEIGHBORS.
>> BEG, BORROW, KIDNAP, DO
WHATEVER YOU HAVE TO DO.
KIDNAPPING ILLEGAL HERE IN IOWA?
(LAUGHTER)
>> Stewart: FORMER SECRETARY OF
STATE HILLARY CLINTON CAMPAIGNED
TODAY WITH HER HUSBAND, THE
FORMER PRESIDENT; AND THEIR
DAUGHTER, CHELSEA.
>> I AM GOING TO WORK TO MAKE
COLLEGE AFFORDABLE FOR
EVERYBODY.
>> Stewart: OUR OWN JUDY
WOODRUFF IS IN IOWA'S CAPITOL OF
DES MOINES AND JOINS ME NOW FOR
MORE ON THE CAUCUSES.
JUDY, WHEN YOU DO THE MATH, YOU
REALIZE THERE'S ONLY 30
DELEGATES AT STAKE FOR THE
REPUBLICANS, 44 FOR DEMOCRATS.
IN THE GIANT BIG PICTURE, THAT'S
ABOUT 1% OF ALL THE DELEGATES.
SO, THIS ISN'T REALLY ABOUT THE
MATH, IS IT?
THIS IS REALLY ABOUT SOMETHING
BIGGER.
>> Woodruff: IT'S NOT ABOUT
THE NUMBERS.
IT'S ABOUT THE FACT THAT IOWA IS
FIRST.
IT'S THE REASON THAT PROBABLY
THE ENTIRE POLITICAL PRESS CORPS
IN THE UNITED STATES-- WHICH IS
NORMALLY SOMEWHERE BETWEEN
WASHINGTON AND NEW YORK-- IS NOW
IN THE STATE OF IOWA.
IT'S BECAUSE THE RESULTS IN IOWA
CATAPULT THE WINNER AND OFTEN
THE PERSON WHO IS SECOND AND
EVEN THIRD ONTO THE NEXT
CONTEST IN NEW HAMPSHIRE, AND
THEN BEYOND THAT TO SOUTH
CAROLINA AND NEVADA.
BUT IT'S ALL ABOUT WHO CAME OUT
OF THE FIRST STATE WHERE THEY
WENT DOOR TO DOOR APPEALING
DIRECTLY TO VOTERS, WHO DID THE
BEST JOB OF CONNECTING.
>> Stewart: THE REPUBLICANS
ARE FOCUSING CLEARLY ON
DIFFERENTIATING THEMSELVES FROM
THE OBAMA ADMINISTRATION'S
LEGACY, FOREIGN POLICY,
HEALTH REFORM, IMMIGRATION.
TED CRUZ AT THE FOREFRONT OF
THIS.
I KNOW YOU WENT TO ONE OF HIS
RALLIES.
HOW IS THAT MESSAGE LANDING?
>> Woodruff: I DID GO TO ONE
OF THE TED CRUZ RALLIES TODAY IN
AMES.
IT WAS AN OVERFLOW CROWD IN A
CONVENTION KIND OF MEETING ROOM
THERE.
VERY ENTHUSIASTIC FOR TED CRUZ.
HIS SUPPORTERS ARE HARD-CORE
CONSERVATIVES WHO ABSOLUTELY
LOVE THE MESSAGE, THE ANTI-OBAMA
MESSAGE, DOWN THE LINE.
BUT THE QUESTION FOR CRUZ IS
WHETHER THE DONALD TRUMP
PHENOMENON, WHICH HAS ABSOLUTELY
UPENDED THIS RACE, IS GOING TO
OVERCOME THE ORGANIZATION AND
THE ANTI-OBAMA MESSAGE OF TED
CRUZ.
AND, FRANKLY, THE FACT THAT
THERE ARE JUST STILL SO MANY
CANDIDATES IN THE RACE, MORE
THAN A DOZEN REPUBLICANS ARE
RUNNING.
>> Stewart: WHEN WE TALK ABOUT
HOW THE DEMOCRATS ARE
POSITIONING THEMSELVES, THEY ARE
OBVIOUSLY BOTH VYING FOR OBAMA
SUPPORTERS-- HILLARY CLINTON
PRESENTING HERSELF AS THE HEIR
IN SOME WAYS; SENATOR BERNIE
SANDERS SAYING, "HEY, I THINK WE
SHOULD GO FARTHER ON HEALTH
REFORM.
I THINK WE SHOULD GO AFTER WALL
STREET."
HOW IS THAT PLAYING OUT?
>> Woodruff: WELL, IT IS A
HUGE BATTLE BETWEEN CLINTON AND
SANDERS.
HILARY CLINTON CAME INTO IOWA,
AND PEOPLE PRESUMED SHE WAS
GOING TO WALK AWAY WITH THIS
BECAUSE OF HER PEDIGREE AND HER
RESUME.
IT HASN'T BEEN THAT AT ALL.
BERNIE SANDERS HAS RUN A VERY
TOUGH RACE HERE.
RIGHT NOW, IT'S COMPETITIVE.
YOUNG PEOPLE IN THIS STATE ARE
SUPPORTING HIM BY ENORMOUS
MARGINS.
SHE, ON THE OTHER HAND, HAS
WORKED THE STATE VERY HARD.
SHE LEARNED SOME LESSONS FROM
2008 WHEN SHE THOUGHT SHE WAS
DOING WELL AND LOST TO BARACK
OBAMA.
IT IS, ALISON, ABOUT WHO CAN
CARRY ON THE OBAMA LEGACY, BUT,
AS YOU SAID, IT'S ALSO, IN
BERNIE SANDERS' CASE, IT'S ABOUT
WHO CAN DO MORE WITH IT THAN
WHAT PRESIDENT OBAMA HAS DONE?
WHO CAN DO AN EVEN BETTER JOB OF
BRINGING HEALTH CARE TO ALL
AMERICANS?
BERNIE SANDERS TALKS ABOUT
SINGLE-PAYER HEALTH CARE AND SO
ON DOWN THE LIST, WHETHER IT'S
GOING AFTER WALL STREET OR SOME
OF THESE OTHER ISSUES THAT ARE
IMPORTANT TO LIBERALS.
>> Stewart: AND BEFORE WE LET
YOU GO, FORMER SECRETARY OF
STATE CLINTON WON THE
ENDORSEMENT OF THE "NEW YORK
TIMES" AS WELL AS THE "DES
MOINES REGISTER" THERE IN IOWA.
WHAT ELSE DOES THE "REGISTER"
HAVE PLANNED TODAY?
>> Woodruff: THEY ARE GOING TO
HOLD A NEWS CONFERENCE AFTER
THIS PROGRAM IS OFF THE AIR,
ANNOUNCING THE RESULTS OF THEIR
LAST POLL BEFORE THE CAUCUSES.
HISTORICALLY, THE "DES MOINES
REGISTER" HAS DONE A BETTER JOB
THAN JUST ABOUT ANYBODY ELSE
FORECASTING THE OUTCOME.
THEIR POLLSTER, ANNE SELTZER,
FAMOUSLY PREDICTED BARACK OBAMA
WAS GOING TO WIN THE CAUCUSES IN
2008 WHEN MOST OTHERS WERE
PREDICTING SOMETHING DIFFERENT.
SO, A LOT OF PEOPLE ARE PAYING
ATTENTION.
IT'S SO BIG THAT THE "DES MOINES
REGISTER" IS HAVING A NEWS
CONFERENCE TO ANNOUNCE THIS POLL
WHEN IT COMES OUT TONIGHT.
>> Stewart: JUDY WOODRUFF,
THANK YOU SO MUCH.
>> Woodruff: GREAT TO TALK TO
YOU.
>> Stewart: AT LEAST 39 MIGRANTS
AND REFUGEES DIED AND 75 WERE
RESCUED TODAY TRYING TO CROSS
FROM TURKEY TO THE GREEK ISLAND
OF LESBOS.
THE TURKISH COAST GUARD RESCUED
SURVIVORS AND RECOVERED BODIES
FROM A 56-FOOT BOAT THAT CARRIED
MORE THAN 100 PEOPLE INTO THE
AEGEAN SEA.
TURKISH OFFICIALS SAY THE BOAT
CAPSIZED WHEN IT HIT ROCKS
SHORTLY AFTER LAUNCH.
THE OFFICIALS SAID MOST OF THE
PASSENGERS WERE SYRIAN, BUT
THERE WAS ALSO PEOPLE FROM
AFGHANISTAN AND MYANMAR.
THE INTERNATIONAL ORGANIZATION
FOR MIGRATION SAYS MORE THAN 250
MIGRANTS HAVE DROWNED THIS MONTH
ON TURKEY-GREECE SEA ROUTES.
IN GERMANY TODAY, CHANCELLOR
ANGELA MERKEL, WHO HAS WELCOMED
MORE THAN A MILLION ASYLUM
SEEKERS IN THE PAST YEAR, SAID
REFUGEES SHOULD RETURN HOME ONCE
THE WARS THAT LED TO THEIR
DEPARTURES ARE RESOLVED.
MERKEL ALSO SAID SHE'S
"DISAPPOINTED" BY SOME EUROPEAN
COUNTRIES TURNING AWAY MIGRANTS.
>> (translated): IT IS
INCOMPREHENSIBLE TO ME THAT A
EUROPEAN UNION WITH 500 MILLION
INHABITANTS CANNOT TAKE IN, FOR
EXAMPLE, ONE MILLION SYRIANS;
WHEREAS A COUNTRY WITH FIVE
MILLION INHABITANTS, LIKE
LEBANON, IS MANAGING IT.
THAT DOES NOT GIVE A GOOD
IMPRESSION OF OUR CONTINENT.
WE SPEAK ABOUT OUR VALUES EVERY
DAY, BUT WE ARE NOT PREPARED TO
DO OUR PART.
>> Stewart: HEALTH OFFICIALS ARE
MOBILIZING TO SLOW THE SPREAD OF
ZIKA, THE MOSQUITO-BORNE VIRUS
POSSIBLY LINKED TO ALMOST 3,500
CASES OF BIRTH DEFECTS IN
BRAZIL, THE COUNTRY WITH THE
HIGHEST NUMBER OF INFECTIONS.
PERU AND JAMAICA REPORTED THEIR
FIRST CASES TODAY, JOINING THE
LIST OF MOSTLY LATIN AMERICAN
AND CARIBBEAN COUNTRIES
EXPERIENCING THE OUTBREAK.
AT LEAST 32 AMERICANS IN 12
STATES AND WASHINGTON, D.C., AND
SIX CANADIANS HAVE BEEN INFECTED
WITH ZIKA, ALL OF THEM FROM
TRAVELING ABROAD TO COUNTRIES
WITH DOCUMENTED INFECTIONS.
THE U.S. CENTERS FOR DISEASE
CONTROL AND PREVENTION HAS
OPENED AN EMERGENCY OPERATIONS
CENTER AND ADVISED PREGNANT
WOMEN TO AVOID TRAVELING TO TWO
DOZEN COUNTRIES WITH ZIKA CASES.
THE WORLD HEALTH ORGANIZATION,
WHICH HOLDS AN EMERGENCY MEETING
ON ZIKA MONDAY IN GENEVA, SAYS
AS MANY AS FOUR MILLION PEOPLE
IN THE AMERICAS COULD BECOME
INFECTED WITH THE VIRUS FOR
WHICH THERE IS NO VACCINE.
LEARN MORE ABOUT THE ZIKA VIRUS,
INCLUDING CONCERNS OVER HOW IT
MAY AFFECT A BABY'S BRAIN.
VISIT www.pbs.org/newshour.
>> Stewart: THE UNITED STATES
MILITARY SAID TODAY THAT THE
U.S.-LED COALITION CARRIED OUT
33 MORE AIR STRIKES INSIDE IRAQ
AND SYRIA YESTERDAY, TARGETING
THE ISLAMIC STATE IN IRAQ AND
SYRIA, KNOWN AS ISIS.
BRITAIN, FOR THE FIRST TIME,
CONVICTED A WOMAN YESTERDAY FOR
TRAVELING TO SYRIA TO JOIN ISIS,
PROSECUTORS SAYING SHE'D BEEN
SELF-RADICALIZED BY VIEWING
EXTREMIST MATERIAL ON THE
INTERNET.
BECAUSE SOCIAL MEDIA IS A KEY
TOOL FOR ISIS OBTAINING NEW
RECRUITS, THE U.S. IS NOW
INCREASING RESOURCES TO FIGHT
THE GROUP ONLINE.
THAT'S THE FOCUS OF TONIGHT'S
SIGNATURE SEGMENT.
AS THE NEWSHOUR'S CHRISTOPHER
BOOKER REPORTS, THE U.S. IS
ENLISTING COLLEGE STUDENTS IN
THE CAUSE.
>> Reporter: AT THE MIDDAY
FORMATION AT THE U.S. MILITARY
ACADEMY AT WEST POINT, EVERY
CADET IS SUBJECT TO INSPECTION.
THE WAY THEY STAND, SALUTE AND
MARCH IS PART OF THEIR
DEVELOPMENT OF A U.S. ARMY
OFFICER.
BUT ACROSS THIS HUDSON RIVER
CAMPUS, IN THE BASEMENT OF THE
SOCIAL SCIENCES BUILDING, A NEW
ASPECT OF CADET EDUCATION IS
UNDER WAY.
WHILE LACKING THE RITUAL AND
REPETITION THAT DOMINATE THIS
PRESTIGIOUS 214-YEAR-OLD
ACADEMY, THE VIRTUAL WARFARE
TACTICS EXPLORED IN THIS
COUNTERTERRORISM ELECTIVE MAY
ONE DAY PROVE TO BE AS INTEGRAL
AS THE MIDDAY FORMATION.
>> INFORMATION HAS ALWAYS BEEN
CRUCIAL TO WARFARE.
AND SO, WHEN YOU TAKE A LOOK AT
PROPAGANDA OVER THE YEARS, IT'S
ALWAYS INFLUENCED THE FIGHT IN
SOME CAPACITY.
>> Reporter: LIEUTENANT COLONEL
BRYAN PRICE DIRECTS WEST POINT'S
COMBATING TERRORISM CENTER.
>> IF YOU TAKE A LOOK AT THE
DOLLARS THAT THE UNITED STATES
GOVERNMENT IS PUTTING INTO ITS
COUNTER-NARRATIVE CAMPAIGN, AND
THEN YOU COMPARE IT TO THE
EMPHASIS THAT ORGANIZATIONS LIKE
THE ISLAMIC STATE IS PLACING ON
IT, I THINK WE ARE OPERATING AT
A DEFICIT.
>> Reporter: THE ISLAMIC STATE
IN IRAQ AND SYRIA, OR ISIS, IS
RUNNING A 21st CENTURY SOCIAL
MEDIA BLITZ, AND ITS PREFERRED
PLATFORM IS TWITTER.
>> IT SAYS HERE "LA, LA, LA,
LA," AND IT'S THE SHADOW, WHICH
IS ON THE ISIS FLAG.
>> Reporter: CADETS IN THIS
CLASSROOM ARE ONE OF 45 COLLEGE
TEAMS DEVELOPING AN ONLINE
CAMPAIGN AGAINST EXTREMISTS.
THE CADETS ARE PART OF A "PEER
TO PEER" COMPETITION SPONSORED
BY THE U.S. STATE DEPARTMENT,
THE DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND
SECURITY, FACEBOOK AND EDVENTURE
PARTNERS.
>> THIS IS THE DEMOGRAPHICS AND
THE GENERATION THAT THE ISLAMIC
STATE AND OTHER JIHADIST
ORGANIZATIONS ARE TARGETING, SO
WHY NOT UTILIZE WHAT APPEALS TO
THAT GENERATION?
>> Reporter: THE TARGET OF
PRICE'S CLASS IS WHAT THEY CALL
"FENCE SITTERS," PEOPLE WHO MAY
OR MAY NOT BE INTERESTED IN
JOINING ISIS OR OTHER JIHADI
GROUPS.
USING A MULTI-PLATFORM APPROACH,
THEY HOPE TO SURREPTITIOUSLY
LURE SOCIAL MEDIA USERS ALREADY
ENGAGED IN CONVERSATIONS
SURROUNDING JIHAD AND OTHER
EXTREMIST IDEAS TO THEIR OWN WEB
SITE, FACEBOOK PAGE, TWITTER
ACCOUNT AND YOUTUBE CHANNEL.
WE HAVE OBSCURED THE SOCIAL
MEDIA PAGES TO AVOID
COMPROMISING THE CADETS' ONGOING
CAMPAIGN.
>> WE ARE NOT THINKING THAT WE
ARE GOING TO CREATE A SOCIAL
MEDIA CAMPAIGN THAT IS GOING TO
STOP CARD-CARRYING MEMBERS OF
THE ISLAMIC STATE AND HAVE THEM
PUT DOWN THEIR ARMS.
WHAT WE'RE TRYING TO DO IS TO
IDENTIFY AT-RISK YOUTH AND TO
CREATE A COMMUNITY ONLINE TO
WHICH THEY CAN GO GET ANSWERS,
INFORMATION ABOUT THE ISLAMIC
STATE, ABOUT JIHAD, ABOUT ISLAM,
AND THOSE FOLKS THAT HAVEN'T
QUITE MADE UP THEIR MIND YET.
>> Reporter: THE CADETS ARE
SEARCHING FOR WAYS TO INSERT
THEIR MESSAGES INTO THE BROADER
SOCIAL MEDIA CONVERSATION, ALL
WITHOUT BEING DETECTED AS WEST
POINT CADETS.
SOMETIMES THEY DO THIS BY
EXPLOITING THE USE OF TWITTER
HASHTAGS.
>> THE ISLAMIC STATE DOES A VERY
GOOD JOB OF UTILIZING TRENDING
HASHTAGS IN ORDER TO GET ON
SITES AND GET ON PEOPLE...
PEOPLE'S TWITTER FEEDS WHERE
THEY WOULDN'T NORMALLY BE ON
THERE.
FOR EXAMPLE, SO, IF THE SUPER
BOWL WAS TRENDING, THEY WILL
INCLUDE WHATEVER MESSAGES THEY
WANT, BUT THEY ALL INCLUDE THE
HASHTAG #SUPERBOWL.
AND SO, WE ARE TRYING, UTILIZING
SOME OF THOSE SAME TECHNIQUES.
>> Reporter: DIRECT MESSAGING
ALSO ALLOWS THE CADETS TO
INTERACT ONE ON ONE WITH USERS.
>> THIS IS SOMEONE FROM THE
MIDDLE EAST WHO IS IN THE 18-40
AGE BRACKET, TELLING US WE HAVE
A NICE PAGE.
>> Reporter: DURING OUR VISIT,
THE CADETS SAID THEY RECEIVED A
FACEBOOK MESSAGE FROM SOMEONE
THEY BELIEVED TO BE IN THE
MIDDLE EAST.
SENIOR C.J. DREW WAS ONE OF THE
FIRST TO READ IT.
>> IN THIS INSTANCE, WE WERE
REACHED OUT TO BY A PERSON WHO
HAD SEEN OUR PAGE, AND THE FIRST
THING THAT CAME UP TO THEM WAS
JIHAD.
AND THEY LOOKED LIKE THEY WERE A
FENCE SITTER OR SOMEONE WE
CONSIDER TO BE VULNERABLE TO
TARGETING BY ISIS, AND THEY
WANTED MORE INFORMATION.
AND THEY WANTED TO ENGAGE US AND
TELL US WHAT JIHAD MEANT TO
THEM.
>> Reporter: DREW, WHO SPEAKS
ARABIC, SAYS THEIR POSTS NEED TO
BALANCE WRITING IN ENGLISH AND
OTHER LANGUAGES TO LOOK AS
AUTHENTIC AS POSSIBLE.
IF A POST HAS TOO MUCH POLISH,
THE TEAM RISKS EXPOSING ITSELF.
>> WE HAD A COUPLE TIMES WHERE I
WAS ABLE TO USE HASHTAGS THAT
ISIS USES A LOT, ESPECIALLY
AFTER THE PARIS ATTACKS, AND WE
HAD MULTIPLE CONVERSATIONS WITH
SOME OF THEM.
>> Reporter: WHILE WEST POINT'S
APPROACH IS TO ENTER A
CONVERSATION ALREADY UNDER WAY,
THIS NEW YORK UNIVERSITY
GRADUATE CLASS IS LOOKING FOR
INDIVIDUALS WHO MIGHT NOT BE IN
THE CONVERSATION AT ALL.
THE CLASS CREATED THE "#7 TRAIN
STOP PROJECT," NAMED AFTER THE
NEW YORK CITY SUBWAY LINE THAT
RUNS THROUGH THE CITY'S MOST
DIVERSE BOROUGH, QUEENS.
THE ONLINE PLATFORM ENCOURAGES
IMMIGRANTS TO SHARE THEIR
EXPERIENCES LIVING IN THE
BOROUGH.
N.Y.U. PROFESSOR COLETTE
MAZZUCELLI TEACHES THE CLASS.
>> WE WANTED TO REALLY FOCUS ON
THE DIFFICULTIES, THE
VULNERABILITIES OF IMMIGRANT
INTEGRATION AND THE WAYS IN
WHICH IMMIGRANTS ARE VULNERABLE.
THEY MIGHT BE MORE PRONE TO
INDOCTRINATION, AND THEREFORE WE
HAVE TO PROMOTE THIS IDEA OF THE
AMERICAN NARRATIVE, WHICH IS TO
INTEGRATE THESE IMMIGRANTS IN
THESE COMMUNITIES WELL INTO
THEIR NEW ENVIRONMENTS.
>> Reporter: IN THE UNITED
STATES, THE NUMBER OF
INDIVIDUALS RADICALIZED BY ISIS
IS BELIEVED TO BE LOWER THAN IN
EUROPE, BUT IT'S ALSO BELIEVED
TO BE INCREASING.
SO FAR, THE U.S. GOVERNMENT HAS
BROUGHT CRIMINAL CHARGES AGAINST
ABOUT 80 PEOPLE FOR ISIS-RELATED
ACTIVITIES-- 61 CASES LAST YEAR,
THE MOST NEW CASES SINCE THE
SEPTEMBER 11, 2001 ATTACKS.
>> SOCIAL MEDIA PLAYS A BIG ROLE
IN THE RECRUITMENT OF AMERICANS
WHO JOIN ISIS.
>> Reporter: SEAMUS HUGHES,
DEPUTY DIRECTOR OF THE GEORGE
WASHINGTON UNIVERSITY'S PROGRAM
ON EXTREMISM, IS THE CO-AUTHOR
OF "ISIS IN AMERICA: FROM
RETWEETS TO RAQQA."
>> WE DON'T HAVE COMMUNITIES
THAT RADICALIZE IN THE U.S., WE
HAVE INDIVIDUALS THAT
RADICALIZE.
THEY ARE GOING ONLINE, AND THEY
ARE FINDING LIKE-MINDED
INDIVIDUALS.
THEY ARE NOT FINDING IT AT
MOSQUES AND COMMUNITY CENTERS.
>> Reporter: HUGHES SAYS RADICAL
MESSAGES ONLINE ARE LIKE AN ECHO
CHAMBER.
>> WE LOOKED AT ABOUT 300
ACCOUNTS OF AMERICANS WE BELIEVE
TO BE ISIS SUPPORTERS ONLINE
OVER A SIX-MONTH PERIOD.
AND WHAT WE SAW WAS, THEY DIDN'T
HEAR DISSENTING VOICES; THEY
ONLY HEARD WHAT THEY WANTED TO
HEAR.
THEY WERE ONLY PUSHING THE
PROPAGANDA THAT THEY BELIEVED
IN.
SO, WHEN YOU HAD PEOPLE TRYING
TO INTERJECT THEMSELVES INTO THE
CONVERSATION, THEY WERE QUICKLY
PUSHED OUT.
>> Reporter: LAST YEAR, HUGHES
MONITORED AN ALLEGED ISIS
SUPPORTER...
>> HE IDENITIFIED HIMSELF AS AN
AMERICAN.
>> Reporter: ...AN OHIO MAN WHO
CALLED HIMSELF "LONE WOLF" ON
TWITTER.
TWITTER REGULARLY SUSPENDED HIS
ACCOUNT, ONLY TO SEE "LONE WOLF"
RETURN AGAIN AND AGAIN.
THE USER WAS EVENTUALLY ARRESTED
AFTER HE ALLEGEDLY RELEASED THE
HOME ADDRESSES OF U.S. SOLDIERS
AND URGED PEOPLE TO KILL THEM.
>> IT'S VERY HARD TO TRY TO
FIGURE OUT WHEN SOMEONE'S GOING
TO MAKE THAT LEAP OVER TO
MILITANCY.
>> Reporter: THE PEER-TO-PEER
COMPETITION THAT N.Y.U. AND WEST
POINT ARE INVOLVED IN, ALSO
CALLED P2P, IS PART OF THE STATE
DEPARTMENT'S ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
THAT IT NEEDS TO CHANGE ITS
APPROACH.
>> WHAT WE NEED TO DO IS GET IN
THE MIDDLE, AND GET IN THE
MIDDLE SO THAT WE CAN ACTUALLY
REACH PEOPLE WHO ARE AT RISK OF
RECRUITMENT.
>> Reporter: EVAN RYAN IS THE
ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF STATE FOR
EDUCATION AND CULTURAL AFFAIRS
AND A P2P COMPETITION JUDGE.
THE U.S. STATE DEPARTMENT HAS,
FOR LACK OF A BETTER TERM,
STRUGGLED WITHIN THIS SPACE.
WHY DO YOU THINK THAT IS?
>> WELL, LISTEN, WE CAN'T DO
THIS ON OUR OWN; WE NEED TO WORK
WITH PARTNERS ACROSS THE BOARD.
AND THAT'S WHAT WE ARE DOING
WITH THIS PROGRAM P2P, WORKING
WITH UNIVERSITY STUDENTS.
BUT WE ARE REACHING OUT BROADLY
TO ORGANIZATIONS, THE PRIVATE
SECTOR, OTHER ENTITIES, PUTTING
MINDS TOGETHER TO THINK ABOUT
HOW WE CAN BEST ADDRESS THIS
PROBLEM.
>> Reporter: AND ONE OF THE BIG
QUESTIONS, I GUESS, SURROUNDING
THESE PRIVATE PARTNERSHIPS IS
THAT THEIR DEALINGS ARE
OVERSEAS.
OBVIOUSLY FACEBOOK, TWITTER,
THESE ARE GLOBAL USERS, SO THEY
ARE JUGGLING A LOT OF
PARAMETERS.
IS IT DIFFICULT TO BRING THEM
INTO THE FOLD?
>> I THINK THEY UNDERSTAND THIS
IS WHERE THIS DEMOGRAPHIC THAT
WE ARE TRYING TO REACH LIVES
TODAY.
THEY LIVE ONLINE.
THEY LIVE ON THESE PLATFORMS.
SO, WHEN WE ARE ABLE TO SIT DOWN
WITH A FACEBOOK AND HAVE THEM AS
A PARTNER, THAT IS REALLY
IMPORTANT TO US.
AND WE ARE LOOKING FORWARD TO
ESTABLISHING MORE PARTNERSHIPS
JUST LIKE THAT.
>> Reporter: THE P2P COMPETITION
IS NOT THE FIRST TIME THE STATE
DEPARTMENT HAS EXPERIMENTED IN
THIS SPACE.
UNTIL LAST YEAR, ALBERTO
FERNANDEZ WAS STATE'S
COORDINATOR FOR STRATEGIC
COUNTERTERRORISM COMMUNICATIONS.
TO COUNTER EXTREMIST PROPAGANDA,
HIS TEAM LAUNCHED THE "THINK
AGAIN, TURN AWAY," CAMPAIGN,
WHICH INCLUDED THE RELEASE OF
THE VIDEO TITLED "WELCOME TO THE
ISLAMIC STATE LAND," A GRAPHIC,
MINUTE-LONG VIDEO MEANT TO
UNDERCUT THE GROUP'S MESSAGE
WITH SATIRE.
>> WHAT WE TRIED TO DO WHEN I
WAS THERE IS, WE TRIED TO BE
EXTREME AND RADICAL.
AND WE WERE TOO EXTREME AND TOO
RADICAL FOR GOVERNMENT BUT NOT
EXTREME AND RADICAL ENOUGH FOR
THE CHALLENGE WE FACE.
SO, WE KIND OF FELL BETWEEN TWO
STOOLS.
>> Reporter: NOW WITH THE MIDDLE
EAST MEDIA RESEARCH INSTITUTE,
FERNANDEZ SAYS WHILE THE P2P
COMPETITION IS A STEP IN THE
RIGHT DIRECTION, IT IS ONLY A
SMALL PART OF THE NEW STRATEGY
NEEDED.
>> SO, IF YOU ARE TALKING ABOUT
A REVOLUTIONARY INSURGENT
ORGANIZATION, WHICH IS THE
ISLAMIC STATE, IT IS GOING TO
TAKE A WHILE FOR GOVERNMENT TO
TURN THAT OLD BATTLESHIP
AROUND.
I THINK THE IDEA THAT, WITH ALL
RESPECT, THAT WEST POINT
CADETS ARE GOING TO BE ABLE TO
DO THAT DEEP DIVE, TO HAVE THAT
TIME TO FOLLOW THROUGH AND THE
DEPTH TO DO IT, IS PROBABLY
UNLIKELY.
>> Reporter: PERHAPS, BUT THE
SCALE OF THE TASK DOES NOT SEEM
TO BOTHER THESE CADETS.
IN THIS COMPETITION OF 45 TEAMS,
THEIR ENTRY WAS SELECTED AS ONE
OF THE THREE FINALISTS.
NEXT MONTH, THEY WILL HEAD TO
WASHINGTON TO PRESENT THEIR
PROJECT.
>> Stewart: FIND OUT MORE ABOUT
HOW THE ISLAMIC STATE USES
CROWDSOURCING AND OTHER TACTICS
AS PART OF A SOCIAL MEDIA
STRATEGY.
VISIT www.pbs.org/newshour.
>> Stewart: MEDICAL RESEARCHERS
HAVE DISCOVERED A GENE THAT
INCREASES THE RISK OF
SCHIZOPHRENIA, A MENTAL ILLNESS
THAT AFFECTS MORE THAN TWO
MILLION AMERICANS, SOMETIMES
CAUSING DELUSIONS AND
HALLUCINATIONS.
THE FINDING WAS FIRST REPORTED
THIS WEEK IN THE SCIENTIFIC
JOURNAL "NATURE."
STEVEN McCARROLL, AN ASSOCIATE
PROFESSOR OF GENETICS AT HARVARD
UNIVERSITY, IS THE STUDY'S LEAD
AUTHOR, AND HE JOINS ME NOW FROM
SAN FRANCISCO.
PROFESSOR, WHAT WAS THE
CONVENTIONAL WISDOM ABOUT
SCHIZOPHRENIA PRIOR TO THIS
STUDY, AND WHAT WAS THE MISSING
PIECE OF RESEARCH ABOUT THAT
BRAIN DISORDER THAT SCIENTISTS
WERE LOOKING SO HARD FOR?
>> WELL, THERE HAVE BEEN
HUNDREDS OF THEORIES ABOUT
SCHIZOPHRENIA OVER THE DECADES,
AND IT HAS BEEN HARD TO TELL
WHICH IF ANY OF THOSE THEORIES
WAS RIGHT.
WHAT IS NEW HERE IS A VERY
STRONG GENETIC LINK TO A VERY
SPECIFIC GENE, AND SPECIFIC
VERSIONS OF THAT GENE, AND
UNDERSTANDING OF WHAT THAT GENE
ACTUALLY DOES AND HOW IT SHAPES
THE WIRING OF THE BRAIN.
>> Stewart: SO, CAN YOU WALK US
THROUGH WHAT THAT GENE DOES?
>> SO THIS GENE, WHICH IS CALLED
C-4, IS IN A NEIGHBORHOOD OF
THE HUMAN GENOME THAT HAS
HUNDREDS OF IMMUNE SYSTEM GENES
IN IT.
AND THAT REGION WAS PREVIOUSLY
LINKED TO SCHIZOPHRENIA.
WHAT WE DISCOVERED, THOUGH, WHEN
WE GOT TO THE BOTTOM OF IT
AND FIGURED OUT WHAT GENE WAS
PROPELLING THE SIGNAL IS THAT IT
IS A GENE THAT, YES, COMES FROM
THE IMMUNE SYSTEM, BUT IT HAS
THIS NIGHT JOB IN THE BRAIN, AND
THAT IN FACT IT PLAYS A ROLE IN
INSTRUCTING THE WIRING OF THE
BRAIN BY CAUSING SYNAPSES,
THE CONNECTIONS BETWEEN NERVE
CELLS, TO BE ELIMINATED AT
PARTICULAR TIMES IN DEVELOPMENT.
>> Stewart: NOW, THIS
ELIMINATION, THAT'S A NORMAL
OCCURRENCE.
WHAT YOU DISCOVERED IS THAT IT
GOES FARTHER THAN THAT.
IT GOES HAYWIRE?
>> THAT'S RIGHT.
ALL OF US GO THROUGH LOTS OF
SYNAPSE ELIMINATION IN OUR
TEENS AND 20s, AND IT INVOLVES
THE PRODUCT OF THIS GENE.
BUT WHAT WE BELIEVE BASED ON
THESE RESULTS IS THAT THAT
PROCESS SOMEHOW GOES AWRY, AND
IN PARTICULAR IT MAY GO INTO
OVERDRIVE AND RESULT IN THE
ELIMINATION OF TOO MANY
SYNAPSES.
>> Stewart: SO WHAT DOES THIS
INFORMATION-- HOW DOES IT HELP
US WITH THE DIAGNOSIS OF
SCHIZOPHRENIA AND WITH THE
TREATMENT OF SCHIZOPHRENIA?
>> DRUGS FOR SCHIZOPHRENIA TODAY
TREAT JUST ONE OF THE SYMPTOMS
OF SCHIZOPHRENIA, WHICH IS THE
SYMPTOM CALLED PSYCHOSIS, WHICH
ARE THE HALLUCINATIONS AND
DELUSIONS.
THOSE ARE ACTUALLY JUST ONE OF
MANY SYMPTOMS OF SCHIZOPHRENIA.
AND IF YOU ASK MOST PATIENTS
WHAT ARE THE SYMPTOMS THAT MOST
BOTHER THEM, WHAT THEY WILL TELL
YOU IS THAT IT'S THE AGONIZING
COGNITIVE DECLINE THAT MANY OF
THEM SUFFER IN THEIR FIRST
DECADE AFTER DIAGNOSIS.
THERE ARE NO DRUGS TODAY THAT
ADDRESS EITHER THE COGNITIVE
LOSSES IN SCHIZOPHRENIA OR THE
EMOTIONAL WITHDRAWAL OR THE
UNDERLYING DISEASE.
>> Stewart: SO IF I'M
UNDERSTANDING WHAT YOU'RE
SAYING, THE IDEA IS THIS GENETIC
COMPONENT IS A WAY TO IDENTIFY
THE DISEASE BEFORE YOU EVEN HAVE
TO DEAL WITH THE SYMPTOMS.
>> WELL, THE GENETICS IS A WAY
TO UNDERSTAND THE DISEASE.
YOU KNOW, WHEN WE WERE IN
SCHOOL, WE LEARNED... GENETICS
THAT WE LEARNED WAS THIS VERY
SIMPLE GENETICS-- BIG "B,"
LITTLE "B."
IT TURNS OUT THAT ALMOST NO
COMMON DISEASES ACTUALLY WORK
THAT WAY.
THEY'RE SHAPED BY THE INTERPLAY
OF HUNDREDS OF GENES.
AND DISCOVERING THOSE GENES IS A
WAY OF TELLING US WHAT THOSE KEY
BIOLOGICAL PROCESSES ARE SO THAT
YOU CAN POINT DRUG DEVELOPMENT
TOWARD THE RIGHT BIOLOGICAL
PROCESSES.
BUT TESTING FOR ANY ONE OF THOSE
GENES IN THE ABSENCE OF THAT
COMPLETE UNDERSTANDING DOESN'T
TEACH YOU ANYTHING.
SO, SO WE DON'T RECOMMEND THAT
AT ALL.
THE KEY THING IS GOING TO BE
UNDERSTANDING THE DISEASE WELL
ENOUGH TO DEVELOP NEW MEDICINES
AND MAKE THE SAME KINDS OF
PROGRESS THAT WE'VE SEEN IN
CANCER OVER THE LAST 10 OR 20
YEARS.
>> Stewart: STEVEN
McCARROLL, THANK YOU SO MUCH
FOR EXPLAINING YOUR WORK.
>> YOU'RE WELCOME.
>>THIS IS PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND,
SATURDAY.
>> Stewart: WITH NO ADVANCE
WARNING, A U.S. NAVY SHIP TODAY
PASSED WITHIN A DOZEN NAUTICAL
MILES OF AN ISLAND IN THE SOUTH
CHINA SEA CLAIMED BY CHINA,
TAIWAN AND VIETNAM.
THE PENTAGON SAID THE U.S.S.
"CURTIS WILBUR," A GUIDED
MISSILE DESTROYER, STEAMED NEAR
TREETON ISLAND IN THE PARACEL
ISLANDS TO DEMONSTRATE WHAT THE
PENTAGON CALLED THE RIGHT OF
FREE NAVIGATION IN INTERNATIONAL
WATERS.
CHINA, TAIWAN AND VIETNAM INSIST
ON PRIOR NOTIFICATION BY SHIPS
IN THE AREA, A POSITION THE U.S.
REJECTS.
CHINA CALLED THE "WILBUR'S"
PRESENCE "INTENTIONALLY
PROVOCATIVE AND EXTREMELY
DANGEROUS."
FACEBOOK IS BANNING PRIVATE GUN
SALES ON ITS SOCIAL NETWORK AND
ITS PHOTO-SHARING SITE,
INSTAGRAM.
THE COMPANY SAYS ITS POLICY IS
MEANT TO DISCOURAGE PEER-TO-PEER
SALES THAT ARE LEGAL IN THE U.S.
WITHOUT F.B.I. BACKGROUND CHECKS
ON BUYERS.
THE CHANGE DOES NOT PREVENT
LICENSED GUN DEALERS FROM
MAINTAINING FACEBOOK PAGES AS
LONG AS THEY DO NOT USE THE SITE
FOR SALES.
FACEBOOK SAID IT WOULD RELY ON
USERS TO FLAG POSTS AND MESSAGES
THAT VIOLATE ITS NEW RULES.
FACEBOOK'S MOVE FOLLOWS
PRESIDENT OBAMA'S CALL EARLIER
THIS MONTH TO EXPAND BACKGROUND
CHECKS ON PRIVATE GUN SALES AND
SALES AT GUN SHOWS.
THE NUMBER OF REPORTED
CONCUSSIONS IN THE N.F.L. SOARED
58% THIS SEASON, THE HIGHEST IN
MORE THAN FOUR YEARS.
THE LEAGUE SAYS THERE WERE 182
CONCUSSIONS IN REGULAR SEASON
GAMES, REVERSING A DOWNWARD
TREND SINCE 2012.
THE N.F.L. SAID IT WILL STUDY
WHY CONCUSSIONS ROSE BUT
EMPHASIZED THERE IS BETTER
IDENTIFICATION OF HEAD INJURIES
DURING GAMES.
THE RELEASE OF THE CONCUSSION
DATA YESTERDAY CAME A LITTLE
MORE THAN A WEEK BEFORE SUPER
BOWL 50 KICKS OFF IN SANTA
CLARA, CALIFORNIA, NEXT SUNDAY.
>> Reporter: ON THE NEXT PBS
NEWSHOUR WEEKEND, A LOOK AT HOW
OKLAHOMA HAS BECOME THE NATION'S
EARTHQUAKE CAPITAL.
THERE WAS A MAGNITUDE 4.5
EARTHQUAKE, AND IT GOT FOLKS
WORRIED THAT NOT ONLY DO THESE
EARTHQUAKES POSE A RISK TO LIFE
AND PROPERTY BUT ALSO TO THE
COUNTRY'S ENERGY INFRASTRUCTURE.
>> Stewart: AND FINALLY, ALL
THREE INMATES WHO ESCAPED FROM A
MAXIMUM SECURITY ORANGE COUNTY,
CALIFORNIA, JAIL EIGHT DAYS AGO
ARE BACK IN CUSTODY TONIGHT.
COUNTY SHERIFFS OFFICIALS SAY
THE TWO INMATES WHO REMAINED AT
LARGE-- JONATHAN TIEU AND
HOSSEIN NAYERI-- WERE ARRESTED
THIS MORNING WHEN POLICE IN SAN
FRANCISCO FOUND THEM HIDING IN A
STOLEN VAN.
THE THIRD ESCAPEE, BAC DUONG,
SURRENDERED TO AUTHORITIES
YESTERDAY IN SANTA ANA.
MORE THAN 10 PEOPLE HAVE BEEN
ARRESTED IN CONNECTION WITH THE
ESCAPE, INCLUDING A FEMALE
TEACHER FROM THE PRISON WHO HAD
WHAT OFFICIALS SAY WAS A
SIGNIFICANT ROLE IN PLANNING THE
JAILBREAK.
THAT'S ALL FOR THIS EDITION OF
PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
I'M ALISON STEWART.
THANKS FOR WATCHING.
GOOD NIGHT.